When Pravin Gordhan was asked to run the South African Revenue Service, his response was: “Oh my God, you’re trying to take me out of politics.” It was late 1997 and Gill Marcus, then the deputy minister of finance, knew that the gap between the revenue collected and potential revenue was about R19-billion. “It became absolutely clear to me that the issue here was not about raising taxes, it was about administration,” she said. Marcus had worked with Gordhan at Codesa—the complex machine that brought South Africa a democratic settlement.
“He had fantastic strategic skill,” she said. “A lot of people can make it happen and they can’t see the big picture and a lot of people can see the picture but can’t do it. Pravin can make it happen and see the picture. And when I looked at the revenue service — the only person who could make it happen was Pravin.” It was “quite counter-intuitive”, Trevor Manuel, then minister of finance, admitted later. So counter-intuitive that Gordhan was suspicious. “It was out of the blue,” he said. “I didn’t know what Sars was, I didn’t know what Sars did. I didn’t realise the impact Sars could have.” As the newly appointed minister of finance, Gordhan is not going into his new job as the turnaround artist required of him in 1998. The treasury has made its own mark on the country and the world, in significant part because of the role Sars has played in providing what Manuel called “fiscal space”. Ten years after Gordhan began at Sars, first as deputy commissioner, then in 1999 as commissioner, revenue collections rose from R184-billion to R558-billion. Last year Sars collected R625-billion, falling below a revised target of R627-billion for the first time in 11 years. Yet it is a tough time. The global recession, which has knocked South Africa’s growth targets, may bite harder yet. It’s “daunting”, says Gordhan, but he is more phlegmatic than alarmist. “Economists say we are much better off than developing or developed countries in the rest of the world. Another way of putting it is that we are the least worst-off country in the world.” Our “least worst-off” status is because of the financial management in the past 12 years: tight banking regulation and the fiscal balance that Manuel developed “on the back of revenue collection — Nobody likes the word ‘prudence’ but it’s there.” The treasury offices have been a second home to Gordhan. He has worked closely with “the finance family”, as he calls it, and been a key strategist in every budget since 1998. “Very early on in my job I realised that there was an umbilical relationship between a tax compliance culture and fiscal stability and fiscal space, and on the other hand, the ability of government to deliver to the poor. We developed a ‘higher purpose’ culture: the link between what you do and how the country benefits. It’s not just about shuffling paper; it’s about serving a higher purpose.” The huge boost in revenues came partly as a result of increased public compliance, but also from sleuth investigative work into the evasive practises of some large corporations. One such firm was Metro Cash & Carry, which claimed returns on VAT for goods it supposedly exported. Most improbable among its “exports” was that of 76-million bras to tiny Lesotho. It led Gordhan to say, memorably, at the time that “the bra has replaced the blanket as Lesotho’s national dress”. Gordhan attributes part of his success at Sars to his “activist” past. Like his predecessor Manuel, he trod the streets in the 1970s and 1980s. “We’d go house to house in the early evening, then we’d meet, then go into smaller meetings to prepare pamphlets till one or two in the morning,” said his old friend and comrade, Constitutional Court Judge Zac Yacoob. “Every night, for years and years.” Yacoob met Gordhan in 1971 at the University of Durban-Westville, when both were students. Gordhan was studying pharmacy, Yacoob law. Both were involved in layers of political activity: community organisations such as the Durban Housing Action Committee (DHAC), legal political organisations such as the Natal Indian Congress and, illegally, in the ANC underground. In fact, Gordhan was Yacoob’s “boss” in the underground movement. For Gordhan there were other layers: first the Communist Party, later Vula, the ANC operation to re-establish leadership in the country in the 1980s. Gordhan was born in April 1949, the third of four children to Jammabad and Rumba Gordhan, who had emigrated in the 1920s from Rajkot in the Gujerat province of India. His father was a jeweller, and later ran a sari shop underneath their flat in Prince Edward Street. His parents were simple people—his mother hardly spoke English—who “imparted no political consciousness to me”. His politics came from high school in Durban, but mostly from university when he arrived at the cusp of the rise of the black consciousness movement. Oddly, Gordhan was never tempted by black consciousness politics. Instead, he made an early and deep commitment to the ANC. He met ANC leaders such as the newly inaugurated president, Jacob Zuma, Sonny Singh and Justin Khuzwayo when they were released from Robben Island in 1974. He had just started work as a young pharmacist at King Edward Hospital in Durban. “People like that gave us a sense of connection to the 1950s and 1960s and to Robben Island. They gave us a sense of Congress tradition and what the Freedom Charter meant.” It may be due to what Yacoob calls Gordhan’s “modesty” that his key role in both the ANC underground and the formation of the United Democratic Front, the largest internal resistance organisation in the country during apartheid, has gone largely unheralded. If there was one “singular intervention” in the genesis of the UDF, says Yacoob, it was Gordhan’s. “He was the architect, the beginning and end of the UDF,” said Yacoob, who himself “flew all over the country to sell the UDF” when Gordhan was under a house-arrest order in 1982. Manuel recalls sitting with Gordhan on the balcony of his little flat overlooking Durban’s busy Prince Edward Street at the end of that year. “We were talking about the civics and the question arose, what is the next step? PG said, why don’t we go for a broad front, a kind of united front?” Then he urged Manuel to go to see “this chap who’d just been elected president of the World Alliance of Reform Churches”—Alan Boesak—to persuade him to make the call publicly. Gordhan reflected that it was “easy” to set up civics and housing organisations then, but “how do you get overt political structures set up? For many years the belief was that if you try it, you’ll die.” The trick was to take the social capital on the ground “somehow extract political capital out of it, yet allow the ground to continue with its day-to-day work.” It was Gordhan, too, who engineered the spectacular sit-in of the British Consulate offices in Durban of six UDF leaders in 1984, according to Yacoob. It caused excruciating embarrassment to Margaret Thatcher’s government, but also—and this was Gordhan’s intention—focused an international spotlight on political detentions. Gordhan himself went through a lengthy spell of detention in 1981 and 1982: 161 days in solitary confinement that ended with him in hospital, first with a dangerous viral eye infection, later with depression. His appointment as finance minister is testimony to Gordhan’s skill in navigating his way through the intense factional politics in the ANC in the past few years. He was an integral part of the Vula operation, and was arrested in 1990 soon after the abduction of two Vula operatives. The police officer who subsequently applied for amnesty for their murder, also brutally tortured Gordhan with the suffocation method to extract information about the first meeting of the Communist Party in the country. The news had already been in the papers. “They were just trying to break me. So I refused to tell them.” This kind of determination will probably come in handy as Gordhan faces down new demands for delivery and the constraints of global reality. His friend, Yacoob, thinks his appointment as a minister is “long overdue”, citing his “ability to make policy choices, his commitment to people, his commitment to constitutionalism and reform and his feeling that things must go right for the people of this country”. Gordhan has set himself a more modest, but critical goal. He quotes the British economist, Richard Layard, who has tried to measure the “happiness” and “misery” quotient in economic policy. “The least you can do,” says Gordhan, “is to make sure that the world is less miserable when you leave it. If all of us can just commit to leaving South Africa slightly less miserable and slightly happier —” A minister of happiness at the treasury? Many of his old comrades think he may just pull it off.